------
title: Limiting 'likes' sent anonymously - Part 3
summary: The "Puppy-Love" algorithm - Part 3
tags: algorithm, crypto, puppy
category: project
id: puppy-3
author: Saksham Sharma
------

<!-- <script type="text/x-mathjax-config"> -->
<!-- MathJax.Hub.Config({ -->
<!--   tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']]} -->
<!-- }); -->
<!-- </script> -->
<!-- <script type="text/javascript" async -->
<!--   src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML"> -->
<!-- </script> -->

### Recap
For those who haven't read the previous posts [part 1](/2016/10/puppy1/) and [part 2](/2016/11/puppy2/), this is a challenge which came up while trying to develop a secure version of a platform called *Puppy Love*. The introduction and the algorithmic challenge, taken from the previous 2 articles:

<!--more-->

The queerly named *Puppy Love* platform has been running in my university since 2014, meant to help shy nerds meet their crush, made my the Programming Club (of which, I happen to be the current coordinator). The platform opens 1 week prior to the Valentine's Day every year, and let's people choose up to 4 of their crushes, encrypting their choices with their password. At the stroke of the midnight hour, everyone logs back, and their choices are decrypted, and are then matched to other people's choices. Only the people who matched are informed about it. If your *love* was unrequited (the other person didn't like you), you will not get to know. More importantly, if you did not like the other person, you would not know if that person liked you or not.

### Limiting your likes: The challenge
In part 2, we ensured that the server would not get to know the individual choices of the users, and would only know if both of the parties *matched*. There still exists, an issue with this. Since the server has no idea about your choices, it cannot prevent you from sending a *like* to everyone you know. Theoretically, you could send one to everyone, and basically find out who likes you. Of course, this comes with the additional baggage of having to explain to the person that you actually cheated and do not like them back.

### Algorithm
Here is a possible solution to this challenge. To explain that, I shall go over the current algorithm (taken from Part 2):

* Both parties have shared secret values A and B. These are not known to Eve by virtue of public key encryption.
* Parties agree to this protocol:
  + Alice sends value `a = A` to Eve if she likes Bob.
  + Alice sends value `a = random` to Eve if she does not like Bob.
  + Bob sends value `b = B` to Eve if he likes Alice.
  + Bob sends value `b = random` to Eve if he does not like Alice.
* Eve receives `a` and `b`. She stores `hash(a*b)` as result.
* Alice and Bob manually compute `hash(A * B)`, and send it to server (server can verify malicious behavior if they don't match)
* It is a match only if the result and the expected value by both parties are the same.

Note here, that the server shall not find out more than one of A, B if the two parties did not match. But if they match, this would be a cue for the server that there was a match. Now, this is a good point to ensure that both the users did not send more than 4 likes, and this match, indeed, was expected. Here is a sketch of how this could be done:

* Once you finalize your choices, you need to inform the server about them in a way that it cannot find out unless that choice actually matched.
* If your likes are *m1*, *m2*, *m3* and *m4*, assume that the negotiated values `A` and `B` are: *A1*, *B1* and so on.
* You send the value `AES_enc('m1')` encrypted with a password `A1-password-B1` or some other function of both `A1` and `B1`.
* The server shall accept only 4 of such terms.
* When the server detects a match, it shall look up in the list of terms you sent, and try decrypting them, to ensure that this particular match was among the 4 you had expected. It should ideally find exactly one term which gets decrypted.
* If there is a match which was not intended, it is simply dropped.

This way, only 4 of your likes can actually result in matches. The server still cannot detect your choices. Profit `:)`
